---
title: Convex Hull
anki-deck-title: Computational Geometry
anki-deck-title: Computational Geometr
---

# Convexity

::: {.definition}
convex

A point set $P$ is called convex if the convex combination of each SUBSET of $P$ is still a SUBSET of $P$.
:::

::: {.definition}
convex hull

all convex combinations of all its subsets
:::

# Extreme Points

::: {.definition}
extreme point (EP)

A point $p$ of $S$ is called an extreme point if there exists a line $L$ through $p$ such that all points of $S$ lie on the same side of $L$
:::

::: {.definition}
CH problem for 2d ($\CHP{2}$)

get all EP of point set $S$ and sort them in counterclockwise.
:::

::: {.algorithm}
triangle criterion of EP
:::

::: {.algorithm #brute-search-EP}
brute search of EP
:::

::: {.theorem}
complexity of [brute search of EP](#brute-search-EP)

$\Upper{n^{4}}$
:::

::: {.algorithm #in-triangle-test}
In-Triangle Test
:::

::: {.algorithm #TLT}
To-Left Test

use signed area.
:::

# Extreme Edges

::: {.definition}
extreme edges (EE)

edge of a convex hull
:::

::: {.algorithm #brute-search-EE}
brute search of EE
:::

::: {.theorem}
complexity of [brute search of EE](#brute-search-EE)

$\Upper{n^{3}}$
:::

# Incremental Construction

::: {.algorithm #ICPT}
In-Convex-Polygon-Test (ICPT)
:::

::: {.theorem}
complexity of [In-Convex-Polygon-Test](#ICPT)

$\Upper{\log n}$
:::

::: {.remark}
why not [In-Convex-Polygon-Test](#ICPT)?

To use DAC, we need to use vector to store EP. If the new point doesn't lie in convex polygon, then we might need to remove some old EPs, which is not efficient in vector.
:::

::: {.algorithm #incremental-construction-EE}
incremental construction by computing tangents

insert one point:

loop all points in current convex hull
```haskell
case (ToLeft x v (pred v), ToLeft x v (succ v)) of
  (Left , Left ) -> s
  (Right, Right) -> t
  (Right, Left ) -> "vertices on the path" (s, t)
  (Left , Right) -> "vertices on the path" (t, s)
```

If all vertex has `(Right, Left)`{.haskell} pattern, then it's interior point.
:::

::: {.theorem}
complexity of [incremental construction](#incremental-construction-EE)

- inserting one point: $\Upper{n}$
- total: $\Upper{n^{2}}$
:::

::: {.algorithm #Jarvis}
Jarvis' algorithm (Jarvis March) to find EEs

```preudocode
Find O an extreme point
Find OK the first extreme edge
Repeat
  Find the next extreme edge KS
  K = S
until K == O
```

:::

::: {.theorem}
complexity of [Jarvis March](#Jarvis)

$\Upper{\cardinal{\CH{S}} n}$
:::

# Lower Bound

::: {.definition}
Reduction

$W \ReductionN U$ means we can reduce problem $W$ to problem $U$ in $\Upper{n}$.
:::

::: {.theorem #sorting-ch}
reduction between SORTING and $\CHP{2}$

$\text{SORTING} \ReductionN \CHP{2}$
:::

::: {.proof}
[reduction between SORTING and $\CHP{2}$](#sorting-ch)

project point $x$ on axis to $(x, x^{2})$, then computing the convex hull. Then project it back to axis since $\CH{\cdot}$ are sorted in counterclockwise.
:::

# Graham Scan: Algorithm

::: {.algorithm #Graham-Scan}
Graham Scan's algorithm

Use polar angle, start from LTL.
:::

# Graham Scan: Example

# Graham Scan: Correctness

::: {.theorem}
Graham Scan algorithm is correct.

Induction.
:::

# Graham Scan: Analysis

::: {.theorem #complexity-of-Graham-Scan}
complexity of Graham Scan

$O(n)$.
:::

::: {.proof}
[complexity of Graham Scan](#complexity-of-Graham-Scan)

There are two ways to get:

1. Edges examined by GS never intersect and hence they form a planar graph. Using planarity we can get $e \leq 3 v$. Therefore complexity is $O(3 n)$.
1. Let `A = S.size() + 2 * T.size()`, `S` is the stack to store elements in current convex hull, `T` is the stack storing unprocessed elements. Then `A` decrease `1` in each iteration, therefore complexity is $O(2 n - 5)$ (At first, `A = 2 * n - 2`, at the end, `A >= 3`).
:::

::: {.remark}
sort by polar angle

Use [TLT](#TLT).
:::

# Divide-and-conquer (1)

::: {.algorithm}
merge subhulls

If $x$, the centroid of $P_{1}$ lie inside $P_{2}$, use polar angle.

Otherwise, use [algorithm in incremental construction](#incremental-construction-EE), then use polar angle.
:::

# Divide-and-conquer (2)

::: {.algorithm #horizontal-DAC-construct-convex-hull}
merge horizontal separated subhulls
:::

::: {.remark}
degeneracy of [horizontal DAC when constructing convex hull](#horizontal-DAC-construct-convex-hull)

3 points colinear / 2 points lying on a vertical line
:::

# Expected Complexity

::: {.theorem #expected-complexity-of-convex-hull}
Let $P$ be a set of $n$ points in the plane. How many points are expected to lie on $\CH{P}$?

$\Upper{\log n}$
:::

::: {.proof}
[Expected complexity of convex hull](#expected-complexity-of-convex-hull)

Number of maximal points is an upper bound of upper-right convex hull. Then use harmonic series.
:::

::: {.remark}
Expected complexity of convex hull in other shape 

There's also some results about expected complexity of convex hull for points uniformly distributed in different shape. Omitted here.
:::

# Quickhull

::: {.algorithm #quickhull}
quickhull
:::

::: {.remark}
Best case and worst case of [quickhull](#quickhull)

triangle and circle.
:::

# Approximate Convex Hull

::: {.algorithm}
Approximate Convex Hull

Slice according to $x$.
:::

# Chan's Algorithm

::: {.algorithm #Chans-Algorithm}
Chan's Algorithm

1. Partition the $n$ points into $r$ groups of equal size $m$
1. For each group, construct its hull using [GS](#Graham-Scan), complexity $r \Upper{m \log m}$
1. Find a point on convex hull.
1. Use [JM](#Jarvis) to get next EP, complexity $\Upper{r \log m} + \Upper{r}$ for each EE. Here use the fact that we can find the tangent between a point and a ordered convex hull with size $m$ (stored in array) in $\Upper{\log m}$.
:::

::: {.theorem}
Complexity of [Chan's Algorithm](#Chans-Algorithm)

$\Upper{n \log m + \cardinal{\CH{S}} r \log m}$
:::

::: {.algorithm}
Algorithm to choose $m$ in [Chan's Algorithm](#Chans-Algorithm).

Compute partial convex hull. In [Chan's Algorithm](#Chans-Algorithm), run last step for at most $m$ times. Then the complexity for one turn is $\Upper{n \log m + m r \log m} = \Upper{n \log m}$. If we pick $m_{i + 1} = m_{i}^{c}$, then total complexity is $\sum_{i = 1}^{k} \Upper{n \log m^{c^{i}}} = \Upper{n \log \cardinal{\CH{S}}}$.
:::

::: {.remark}
Complexity of $\CHP{2}$

It has been proved that lower bound of $\CHP{2}$ is $\Upper{n \log \cardinal{\CH{S}}}$.
:::

# Beyond 2 Dimension

::: {.remark}
cThe worst case is not less than \(\Theta\!\left(n^{\left\lfloor d / 2\right\rfloor}\right)\)

\textbf{There's something else on handout.}
omplexity of $\CHP{d}$

The worst case is not less than $\Bound{n^{\floor{d / 2}}}$

**There's something else on handout.**
:::


# Degeneracy & Instability

::: {.remark}
$3$ or more collinear points

If `k` lie on `qp`, then it lies on both left and right; otherwise, it lie on neither left nor right. We'll know `k` is classified as a left/right point if `q` lies between `p` and `k`.
:::

::: {.algorithm}
between

Suppose collinear, $q$ lies between $p, k$ iff $\vec{pq} \cdot \vec{qk} > 0$
:::

::: {.algorithm}
Refined [In-Triangle Test](#in-triangle-test)

use or operator between Right judgement and Left judgement.
:::

::: {.algorithm}
Refined [brute EE algorithm](#brute-search-EE)

use or operator between Right judgement and Left judgement.
:::

::: {.algorithm}
Refined [Jarvis March](#Jarvis)

Replace `toLeft` by `toRight` if we want to find the points in counterwise order.
:::

::: {.algorithm}
Refined [Graham Scan](#Graham-Scan)

Replace `toLeft` by `toRight` if we want to find the points in counterwise order.
:::
